Solving A Maze - Interview Problem
Marcus Peacock

Running Solution
java -jar MazeSolver.jar path/to/input.txt

There are many algorithms suitable for solving mazes; it is important to
distinguish between algorithms which rely on complete information and which
have incomplete information. For example, an algorithm for moving a robot
through a maze may not begin with a map of the maze and an explorative search
algorithm would have to be used. In the case of incomplete information,
heuristics such as straight line distance to goal are often used to
speed up the search space. However, requiring a heuristic implies
that the goal is to find any solution and not the optimal one. Since
the inputs were sized small enough to do so, I opted for implementing
a solution which was guaranteed to find the optimally-short path to
the goal; breadth-first-search. Breadth-first-search for mazes can be
imagined as flooding the maze with water, if the water moves equally
through the maze, the first bit of water to reach the goal has taken
the shortest path.

My assumptions were that the maze input would be well formed and
pre-validated, that the maze would not be greater in width or height
than the max value of a Java int and that it would be small enough to
fit in memory.

The program operates by first reading the file using Java 8 file
reading, parsing the parameters from the beginning of the file,
making a copy of the maze input to be used for output and then
performing breadth-first-search.

One thing to note about using breadth-first-search is that the
vanilla version of breadth-first-search does not store the path to
the goal discovered. Therefore, I opted to create a map: Position ->
Position which stores the initial position which first discovered the
new position. This allows the map to be traced backwards at the end
in order to build the path back up, marking the path on the map to be
output.

Secondly, breadth-first search is not the easiest to read and
comprehend algorithm the first time, so there is a trade-off being
made between absolute simplicity with producing optimal solutions.

I opted to maintain the solution in a single class file as the
majority of the work was done operating on the 2D-array maze along
with using the stored parameters. Therefore, there would be little
value in splitting MazeSolver in its current form. It may be better
practice to move the main function out of the class and create a
startup class, but I think this is a minor issue.


The second class I created represents points in 2D space. As far as I
know, the standard Java library does not have a good structure for
storing integer points in 2-D space and I wanted to create a HashSet
to store the explored positions and a HashTable to store the path, so
I created a Tuple class for Integers and wrote overriding functions
for equals and hashCode.

The complexity of my solution is the complexity of
breadth-first-search, which in this case for time will be O(V+E)
where V is width * height and E is 4 * V for each edge, this simplifies to
O(V). For space, the maze input is read and transformed, storing some
references to discovered points and edges which will never exceed V or E,
this makes space complexity also O(V).

The first difficulty I came across was that implementing a hashCode
function for an (x, y) coordinate was not a completely trivial exercise.
Therefore, I searched for a solution to this problem and found the Cantor
Pairing Function [1] which solves this problem. My second problem was that
when writing my solution I used the concept of x and y for the maze
coordinates. However, the maze (0, 0) is in the top left corner, meaning it
is easy to make mistakes when using x and y in this context. My initial
solution failed on the large input because I was initializing the maze with
the width and height reversed. These mistakes are bound to happen,
therefore, if I were to rewrite it, I would remove the concept of x and y
entirely and simple use up/down left/right or width/height.

In terms of testing, I opted not to use unit tests or TDD as I expected the
code to be self contained within a single class. I did not draw out an
initial design along with what each function would do, as would be required
for a more time consuming problem, which meant the functions I opted to use
changed and I don’t believe TDD would have improved the development process
in this case.

If I wanted to extend the functionality of the solution, I would certainly
write unit tests for the current functionality. My solution currently does
as expected for all given inputs and for mazes which are impossible.
Therefore, it would be important to maintain this functionality during any
extensions.

Having said that, I did make use of a test using JUnit to be able to see
the output for all the given inputs. I did not assert that these outputs
were strictly correct, I simply verified each one manually.

I believe this problem is a good assessment of coding ability, knowledge of
algorithms and data structures. It is a satisfying and enjoyable problem to
solve, as it represents a real world problem, produces a tangible output,
forces the consideration of multiple technical problems and produces a
large enough solution that efforts to write clean code are visible and
worth-while. This problem took me roughly an hour to write an initial
solution and a further half an hour to do some cleanup, readability
refactoring, packaging and writing this analysis.

[1] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pairing_function#Cantor_pairing_function

